networking 22-09-16

device configuration - switches & end devices

end device has network card
connects to a jack

jack has a punchdown which connects to another cable which goes between rooms to the communications closet

drop ceiling: a visual ceiling 3' below the concrete actual ceiling. makes it look neat.
plenum: space between drop ceiling and real ceiling. contains wiring, lights, hvac, etc.

conduit: a protective tube that contains cables

jack: "outlet" for ethernet/internet

rack unit: 1.75"
a rack-mounted object has a height that is measured in "U" (rack unit)
42u rack can contain 42 instances of 1u devices

usually put power units on the bottom
switches, routers, servers go on racks

servers are like desktop towers but flat

full rack weighs a lot and costs a lot, so its bolted to the floor

patch panel: accepts network cables from jacks
  -normally at the top of the rack
  -then connects to the switch. switch has ports which accepts cables

switch: connects devices together to form a LAN

home-use switches are "unmanaged" - they connect a set number of devices directly

business-class switched are "managed" - they let you tell them what to do
-lots of ethernet ports - use these to connect to the patch panel
-sometimes better ports (gigabit fiber ports)
-generally rack-mounted 1u

best practice is to label each patch panel port with the jack it connects to

switch ports are counted in columns first, then rows
1 3 5 7
2 4 6 8

fixed configuration: you cannot change the number or type of ports

nm: network module. the plug-and-play components of non-fixed switches

bay contains nms

ports are numbered 0/1 0/2 0/3 etc
the 0 means either that its fixed or that its the first nm of an unfixed switch
on multiple bays, the second one will be 1/1 1/2 1/3 etc

console port: allows you to plug in a device and enter command prompts

command line devices - generally use a laptop
connect the serial port of the laptop to the console port on the switch

programs like putty go here?

cisco IOS: internetwork operating system
-tell it what to do with its ports
-security
-everything else
-has SO MANY commands, which you can find in their pdf for free, but its also. SO big

switches are designed to last for decades and handle a LOT of traffic

a home router can handle industrial traffic for approx 3 seconds before it implodes

an industrial switch is worth about $2500 and will last 20 years (situationally)

an operating system has 3 parts
-hardware: all parts and ports
-kernel: communicates between the hardware and the software using drivers
-shell: the part of the OS that you see. user interface
-drivers have to correspond to the kernel

cli: command line interface
gui: graphic user interface
audio interfaces also exist

cli are less resource-intensive and more stable, but less user-friendly

cisco devices normally are cli not gui (some exceptions for routers)

serial: one bit at a time

usb: univeral serial bus

console cable: serial connection at one end, ethernet-looking one on the other (console port. not the same)
-used to plug a laptop into a switch
-new ones are usb

ssh: secure shell - remote connection instead of console cable. encrypted
-cant be used until the device has an ip address
telnet: unencrypted version of ssh. its bad

terminal emulation program: includes PuTTY and Tera Term and hyperterminal
once youre plugged in, use this to enter the cli

switches dont have a power button
you plug it in and its on. forever.

all cisco ports - parity/flow control only matter for modems
9600 bits (speed - faster than your typing speed)
8 data bits (1 byte - 1 character)
1 stop bits (tells it when the data bit is done)

cli are not backdated. you see stuff from when you plug in onwards
no command history from before you arrive

post: power on self test- checks that all hardware is all still there

a real switch takes a minute to boot

.bin : binary file - sort of like an iso or zip file for the os

ram: only there when the computer is on
nvram: lasts without power, actually writes

look at cisco textbook chapter 2