NETWORKING

networking is communication and connection
it is extremely important to everything, highly integrated

NETWORK DEVICES (HARDWARE)

host device: any device being used by a person, which has an IP address. see also: end device
end device: host device; places where data originates or arrives

server: device which provice services to end devices.
-email, web, etc.
-has multiple clients
-more powerful than an end device
-constructed like desktop towers but flat

client: device which sends requests to servers
-obtain webpages, emails, etc

intermediary: device which connects end devices (router, etc).
-regenerates and directs signals
-sends error logs

switch: connects devices together to form a LAN. intermediary

fixed configuration: you cannot change the number or type of ports
nm: network module. the plug-and-play components of non-fixed switches
bay: the sockets where network modules go

patch panel: accepts network cables from jacks. intermediary

command line devices: used to configure other devices. generally use a laptop

NETWORK MEDIUMS (HARDWARE)

they cannot be pure enough, so theyre not perfectly efficient
laser is an acronym: light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation

copper wiring - electric impulses sent through copper wires. the cheapest/slowest
fiberoptics - glass transmission of light pulses
wireless - uses radio waves

near-field communication: tap technology and etc

there are cables running across the ocean

DSL: digital subscriber line. dedicated to internet only

lease line: business-specific internet cables, direct to the ISP

satellite still used where cables cannot go
keep in mind that not everyone has access to the same technology

power outlets can be used for internet with an adapter
jack: "outlet" for ethernet/internet

convergence: put all your networks and connections in one place/cable
-can include internet, phone, etc

NIC: network interface card. wifi, bluetooth, etc. often integrated into the motherboard.
physical port: place where you can plug something in
interface: the data associated with a physical port

console port: allows you to plug in a device and enter command prompts
connect the serial port of the laptop to the console port on the switch

serial: one bit at a time
usb: univeral serial bus

console cable: serial connection at one end, console port on the other
-used to plug a laptop into a switch
-new ones are usb

NETWORK TYPES

peer-to-peer: no centralized server, devices act as both client and server
-easy to set up
-less reliable

LAN: local area network, a network within one physical location. often has one admin company. faster.
WAN: wide area network. the internet is one. often has multiple admin organizations.

Less useful ones:

MAN: metropolitan area network, ex university campus or military base
HAN: home area network, is also a LAN.
PAN: personal area network, includes all the bluetooth devices on your person and more
SOHO: small office / home office

networks are nested
some grey area

demarcation point: where the WAN connects to the LAN

ISP: internet service provider
the internet does not belong to anyone, you pay for the delivery
some organizations help to govern it and structure it
IETF: internet engineering task force

intranet: a private network. not available to outsiders. the HR/finances/email of an organization, etc.
extranet: provides a limited connection to your intranet to outsiders, such as customers and allies.

extranet will be very relevant to us

topology diagram: shows where things in the network are in relation to each other
-physical: shows where things are in the meatspace
-logical: shows how the machines relate to each other

NETWORK FEATURES

reliability:
-quality of service (QoS): prioritizing
-fault tolerance: measures to minimize the impact of failures. recovery possible. multiple paths for each route
-scalability: potential to grow
-security: busiest. functionality vs risk

these factors are often in opposition

installation is not the end. there are endless adjustments to do
maintenance is the core of it

queuing is important. order of tasks

confidentiality
integrity
availability

NETWORK TRENDS

byod: bring your own device
online collaboration
video communication
cloud computing

allowing personal devices on business networks introduces security risks

cloud: anything that is stored online. all email is cloud storage
clouds can be public, private, etc

aas: as a service

geofencing: registers when a device enters a "fenced" area or leaves
-mostly used to show relevant ads

threat actors: hackers

ACL: access control list
IPS: intrustion prevention system
IDS: intrusion detection system

internetlivestats.com web stats

5.4bil internet users as of right now
3.2bil active facebook users
140k websites reported as hacked today so far
7.7bil gb transmitted (not stored) today so far

phones way more popular that computers rn

HARDWARE (OTHER)

drop ceiling: a visual ceiling 3' below the concrete actual ceiling. makes it look neat.
plenum: space between drop ceiling and real ceiling. contains wiring, lights, hvac, etc.
conduit: a protective tube that contains cables

rack: tower framework on which you can mount devices. bolted to the floor.

rack unit: 1.75"
a rack-mounted object has a height that is measured in "U" (rack unit)
42u rack can contain 42 instances of 1u devices

SOFTWARE

an operating system has 3 parts
-hardware: all parts and ports
-kernel: communicates between the hardware and the software using drivers
  -drivers have to correspond to the kernel
-shell: the part of the OS that you see. user interface can be cli or gui

cli: command line interface
gui: graphic user interface

ssh: secure shell - remote connection instead of console cable. encrypted
-cant be used until the device has an ip address
telnet: unencrypted version of ssh. its bad

terminal emulation program: allows a laptop to control another device by emulating it

post: power on self test- checks that all hardware is all still there

.bin : binary file - sort of like an iso or zip file for the os